---
title: "3.2.0"
---

RDF4J 3.2.0 is a minor release, fixing 42 issues. It is backward compatible with older RDF4J releases. 
Some of the highlights include:

- Experimental support for [RDF\* and SPARQL\*](/documentation/programming/rdfstar/)
- Remote SHACL Validation reports in the Workbench
- Query plan inspection through the new [explain feature](/documentation/programming/repository/#explaining-queries)
- Various significant performance and scalability improvements in the Native Store

For a complete overview, see [all issues fixed in 3.2.0](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/milestone/42?closed=1).

This release was made possible by contributions from Damyan Ognyanov, Pavel Mihaylov, Allesandro Bollini, H&aring;vard Ottestad, Bart Hanssens, Andreas Schwarte, and Jeen Broekstra. 

For more information about RDF4J contributors, see [Who's involved](https://projects.eclipse.org/projects/technology.rdf4j/who).

## Upgrade notes

RDF4J 3.2.0 is binary compatible with older RDF4J releases. As an end-user, you
can upgrade without any changes to your code.

For third party SAIL implementors, the following notes may be of interest:

To enable RDF\* support in your SAIL implementation, you will need to ensure that
your store accepts statements with a `org.eclipse.rdf4j.model.Triple` as either
the subject or the object.

To additionally enable SPARQL\* support, you will need to ensure that the
`org.eclipse.rdf4j.query.algebra.evaluation.TripleSource` object supplied to
the SPARQL `EvaluationStrategy` is extended to additionally implement
`org.eclipse.rdf4j.query.algebra.evaluation.RDFStarTripleSource`. If your
triplestore implements its own  `EvaluationStrategy` for the RDF4J algebra
model, you will need to extend it to evaluate the new
`org.eclipse.rdf4j.query.algebra.TripleRef` and
`org.eclipse.rdf4j.query.algebra.ValueExprTripleRef` nodes.

Please be advised that RDF\* and SPARQL\* support is currently experimental. We welcome your feedback on the current design and if you require any further input on how to best go about supporting RDF\* and SPARQL\*, we'd love to hear from you.

