---
title: "4.0.0 Milestone 3"
toc: true
---
RDF4J 4.0.0-M3 is the third Milestone build of the upcoming 4.0.0 release of RDF4J.

RDF4J 4.0.0 is a major release of the RDF4J framework, focusing on improved performance and improved maintainability. A large effort to clean up the structure is intended to make it easier to deliver new features in this and future releases.

Some of the highlights covered in this third milestone:

 - improved normalization of BCP47 language tags
 - type/language-based filtering in Lucene full-text search
 - support for concurrent reads on a single connection
 - storing SHACL Shapes in user specified graphs [docs](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/blob/develop/site/content/documentation/programming/shacl.md#shapes-graph)
 - various performance improvements in Native/LMDB/Memory stores

This milestone build is feature-complete and is intended to be the final milestone before official release. We are seeking feedback on any bugs, omissions in documentation or upgrade notes, or any other observations that you'd like to share.

 - [issues fixed in 4.0.0 Milestone 1](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3AM1+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A4.0.0)
 - [issues fixed in 4.0.0 Milestone 2](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3AM2+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A4.0.0)
 - [issues fixed in 4.0.0 Milestone 3](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3AM3+is%3Aclosed+milestone%3A4.0.0)

## Upgrade notes 

RDF4J 4.0.0-M3 contains several [backward incompatible
changes](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22%E2%9B%94+Not+backwards+compatible%22+milestone%3A%224.0.0%22), including removal of several deprecated modules and classes.

### Java 11 required

RDF4J 4.0.0-M3 requires Java 11 at a minimum. Any projects still running older versions of Java will need to upgrade their JVM/JDK before updating their RDF4J version ([GH-2046](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues/2046)).

### RDF4J Server / Console / Workbench application upgrades

When upgrading one of the RDF4J applications (Server, Console, Workbench), when coming from version 3.1.0 or later, the new RDF4J version can be treated as a drop-in replacement.

Older versions of the RDF4J applications can not be upgraded directly to 4.0.0-M3.  This is because support for upgrading from the legacy SYSTEM repository configuration has been removed. We recommend the following upgrade path:

1. upgrade to RDF4J 3.7 and run the application, executing a few queries on one of its repositories. This will upgrade the existing configuration away from the legacy SYSTEM repo used in older application installations.
2. shut down normally.
3. do a second upgrade, to RDF4J 4.0.0.

### Removed deprecated initialize methods on Repository, Sail APIs and RepositoryManager

The deprecated `initialize()` methods on `Repository`, `Sail` and `RepositoryManager`  have been removed. Use `init()` instead. (see [GH-1243](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues/1243) )

### Removed deprecated query builder package

The deprecated `org.eclipse.rdf4j.queryrender.builder` has been removed.
Use `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sparqlbuilder.core.SparqlBuilder` instead.

### LuceneSpinSail removed

The LuceneSpinSail component, which was first marked deprecated in release 3.0.3, has now been removed from the RDF4J project ([GH-1706](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues/1706)).

### SeRQL support removed

The parser for the SeRQL query language, as well as all related code and tool options, has been removed from RDF4J. If you still have SeRQL queries in your project, you will need to rewrite them into SPARQL syntax before upgrading ([GH-2992](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues/2992)).

### Lucene libraries upgraded

The Lucene (full-text search) libraries have been upgraded from 7.7 to 8.5.
This affects projects storing the full-text index to disk (using the `LuceneSail.LUCENE_DIR_KEY`).

Projects upgrading from RDF4J 3.x (Lucene 7.7) to RDF4J 4.0 (Lucene 8.5) should include the `lucene-backwards-codec` 8.5 jar to continue using the existing Lucene 7.7 indexes.

It is recommended to reindex the data / upgrade the Lucene index stored in the `LuceneSail.LUCENE_DIR_KEY` directory,
after which the `lucene-backwards-codec` jar can be removed:
- either programmatically, using the [reindex() method](https://rdf4j.org/javadoc/latest/org/eclipse/rdf4j/sail/lucene/LuceneSail.html#reindex())
- or via the [Lucene index upgrade tool](https://lucene.apache.org/core/8_5_0/core/org/apache/lucene/index/IndexUpgrader.html) which is part of the `lucene-core` jar

Both options may require shutting down the application(s) using the indexed data, it is recommended to back up the index directory before reindexing.

The RDF4J SDK contains both the `lucene-core` and `lucene-backwards-codec` jars.

### Lucene default SearchIndex implementation renamed 

The default Lucene `SearchIndex` implementation has been renamed. Prevously, it was `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.lucene.LuceneIndex`. The new name is `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.lucene.impl.LuceneIndex`. 

### Solr client libraries upgraded

The Solr client libraries have been upgraded from 7.7 to 8.4.
New clients should still be able to work correctly with older Solr servers without code changes, but this cannot be guaranteed.

### ElasticSearch client libraries upgraded

The ElasticSearch client libraries have been upgraded from 6.8 to 7.8.
New clients should still be able to work correctly with older ElasticSearch servers without code changes, but this cannot be guaranteed.

### rdf4j-util module split up

The `rdf4j-util` module has been split up into 8 separate modules, to allow for greater flexibility in our dependency tree and potential smaller footprints. The 8 new modules are as follows:

- `rdf4j-common-annotation` contains internal Java annotation classes (for marking parts of the code experimental or for internal use only);
- `rdf4j-common-exception` contains top level interfaces and classes for exceptions thrown by RDF4J.
- `rdf4j-common-io` contains common file IO utilities and IRI parsing utilities.
- `rdf4j-common-iterator` contains top level interfaces and classes and some common utilities for working with iterators and iterations.
- `rdf4j-common-text` contains utility classes for text/string based operations.
- `rdf4j-common-transaction` contains base classes and interfaces for working with transactions and isolation levels.
- `rdf4j-common-util` contains generically applicable base classes and interfaces.
- `rdf4j-common-xml` contains base functionality and some utility functions for working with XML.

Projects that _directly_ depended on the `rdf4j-util` module will need to change their dependencies to more precisely figure out which of these new 'common' modules to use. 

### `org.eclipse.rdf4j.RDF4JException` moved to `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.exception.RDF4JException`

Projects that directly reference the `RDF4JException` class will need to update their imports.

### `org.eclipse.rdf4j.RDF4JConfigException` moved to `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.exception.RDF4JConfigException`

Projects that directly reference the `RDF4JConfigException` class will need to update their imports.

### Removed deprecated Lucene/Solr/ElasticSearch methods

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.elasticsearch.ElasticsearchIndex`

- `beginReading()`
- `endReading()`
- `parseQuery(String, IRI)`

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.lucene.AbstractLuceneIndex`

- `beginReading()`
- `endReading()`

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.lucene.AbstractSearchIndex`

- `evaluate(QuerySpec)`
- `parseQuery(String, IRI)`

The following method was removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.lucene.LuceneIndex`

- `parseQuery(String, IRI)`

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.lucene.SearchIndex`

- `beginReading()`
- `endReading()`
- `evaluate(QuerySpec)`

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.lucene.SearchQueryEvaluatorTest`

- `beginReading()`
- `endReading()`
- `evaluate(QuerySpec)`

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.solr.SolrIndex`

- `beginReading()`
- `endReading()`
- `parseQuery(String, IRI)`

### Removed deprecated RIO parser settings

The following deprecated settings were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.rio.helpers.NTriplesParserSettings`:

- `FAIL_ON_NTRIPLES_INVALID_LINES` (use `FAIL_ON_INVALID_LINES` instead)

The following deprecated settings were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.rio.helpers.TriXParserSettings`:

- `FAIL_ON_TRIX_MISSING_DATATYPE` (use `FAIL_ON_MISSING_DATATYPE` instead)
- `FAIL_ON_TRIX_INVALID_STATEMENT` (use `FAIL_ON_INVALID_STATEMENT` instead)

### Removed deprecated utility methods

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.io.FileUtil`

- `copyFile(File, File)`
- `createDirIfNotExists(File)`
- `createTempDir(String)`
- `deleteChildren(File)`
- `deleteFiles(File)`
- `deltree(File)`
- `getFileExtension(String)`
- `getRelativeFile(File, File)`
- `getRelativePath(File, File)`
- `isLegalFileName(String)`
- `isLegalFileNameChar(char)`
- `moveRecursive(File, File, Collection<File>)`

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.io.ResourceUtil`

- `getImage(String)`
- `getImageIcon(String)`
- `getURLs(String)`
- `resourceToFile(String,File)`

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.text.StringUtil`

- `concat(String...)`
- `decodeArray(String)`
- `deriveInitialText(String)`
- `encodeArray(String[])`
- `getAllAfter(String, char)`
- `getAllBefore(String, char)`
- `isGarbageText(String)`

### Removed deprecated ProcessLauncher

The `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.platform.ProcessLauncher` class was removed.

### Removed deprecated code from ShaclSail

Removed support for `UndefinedTargetValidatesAllSubjects`, use the dash vocabulary instead.

Removed support for `IgnoreNoShapesLoadedException`. 

Removed `org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.shacl.experimentalSparqlValidation` system property because 
SPARQL based validation is now enabled by default. This can be disabled by setting
`org.eclipse.rdf4j.sail.shacl.sparqlValidation` to false.

### IRI hashCode / equals contract changed

The contract on the `hashCode()` and `equals()` methods for `IRI` has changed
slightly: previously, it was defined to use the value of `toString()` to
calculate the hash, now it's defined to use `stringValue()` instead. Projects
that use their own implementations of the `IRI` interface will need to verify
and possibly adjust their `hashCode()` and `equals()` implementation to conform
to this.

### Refined extension points for evaluation strategies in federation

Removed support for defining `sparqlEvaluationStrategy` and `sailEvaluationStrategy` using `FedXConfig`.

Use `FedXFactory#withFederationEvaluationStrategyFactory` instead to supply a `FederationEvaluationStrategyFactory`.

Removed support for defining the `writeStrategyFactory` through `FedXConfig`. Use `FedXFactory#withWriteStrategyFactory` instead.

## Acknowledgements

This milestone was made possible by contributions from Antoine Willerval, Ken Wenzel, Andreas Schwarte, Florian Kleedorfer, Håvard M. Ottestad, and Jeen Broekstra.
