---
title: "4.0.0"
toc: true
---
RDF4J 4.0.0 is a major release of the Eclipse RDF4J framework. Some highlights:

- ...
-

For a complete overview, see [all issues fixed in 4.0.0](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/milestone/30?closed=1).

## Upgrade notes 

RDF4J 4.0.0 contains several [backward incompatible
changes](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22%E2%9B%94+Not+backwards+compatible%22+milestone%3A%224.0.0%22), including removal of several deprecated modules and classes.

### Java 11 required

RDF4J 4.0.0 requires Java 11 at a minimum. Any projects still running older versions of Java will need to upgrade their JVM/JDK before updating their RDF4J version ([GH-2046](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues/2046)).

### LuceneSpinSail removed

The LuceneSpinSail component, which was first marked deprecated in release 3.0.3, has now been removed from the RDF4J project ([GH-1706](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues/1706)).

### SeRQL support removed

The parser for the SeRQL query language, as well as all related code and tool options, has been removed from RDF4J. If you still have SeRQL queries in your project, you will need to rewrite them into SPARQL syntax before upgrading ([GH-2992](https://github.com/eclipse/rdf4j/issues/2992)).

### Lucene libraries upgraded

The Lucene (full-text search) libraries have been upgraded from 7.7 to 8.5.
This affects projects storing the full-text index to disk (using the `LuceneSail.LUCENE_DIR_KEY`).

Projects upgrading from RDF4J 3.x (Lucene 7.7) to RDF4J 4.0 (Lucene 8.5) should include the `lucene-backwards-codec` 8.5 jar to continue using the existing Lucene 7.7 indexes.

It is recommended to reindex the data / upgrade the Lucene index stored in the `LuceneSail.LUCENE_DIR_KEY` directory,
after which the `lucene-backwards-codec` jar can be removed:
- either programmatically, using the [reindex() method](https://rdf4j.org/javadoc/latest/org/eclipse/rdf4j/sail/lucene/LuceneSail.html#reindex())
- or via the [Lucene index upgrade tool](https://lucene.apache.org/core/8_5_0/core/org/apache/lucene/index/IndexUpgrader.html) which is part of the `lucene-core` jar

Both options may require shutting down the application(s) using the indexed data, it is recommended to back up the index directory before reindexing.

The RDF4J SDK contains both the `lucene-core` and `lucene-backwards-codec` jars.

### Solr client libraries upgraded

The Solr client libraries have been upgraded from 7.7 to 8.4.
New clients should still be able to work correctly with older Solr servers without code changes, but this cannot be guaranteed.

### ElasticSearch client libraries upgraded

The ElasticSearch client libraries have been upgraded from 6.8 to 7.8.
New clients should still be able to work correctly with older ElasticSearch servers without code changes, but this cannot be guaranteed.

### rdf4j-util module split up

The `rdf4j-util` module has been split up into 8 separate modules, to allow for greater flexibility in our dependency tree and potential smaller footprints. The 8 new modules are as follows:

- `rdf4j-common-annotation` contains internal Java annotation classes (for marking parts of the code experimental or for internal use only);
- `rdf4j-common-exception` contains top level interfaces and classes for exceptions thrown by RDF4J.
- `rdf4j-common-io` contains common file IO utilities and IRI parsing utilities.
- `rdf4j-common-iterator` contains top level interfaces and classes and some common utilities for working with iterators and iterations.
- `rdf4j-common-text` contains utility classes for text/string based operations.
- `rdf4j-common-transaction` contains base classes and interfaces for working with transactions and isolation levels.
- `rdf4j-common-util` contains generically applicable base classes and interfaces.
- `rdf4j-common-xml` contains base functionality and some utility functions for working with XML.

Projects that _directly_ depended on the `rdf4j-util` module will need to change their dependencies to more precisely figure out which of these new 'common' modules to use. 

### `org.eclipse.rdf4j.RDF4JException` moved to `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.exception.RDF4JException`

Projects that directly reference the `RDF4JException` class will need to update their imports.

### `org.eclipse.rdf4j.RDF4JConfigException` moved to `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.exception.RDF4JConfigException`

Projects that directly reference the `RDF4JConfigException` class will need to update their imports.

### Removed utility methods

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.io.FileUtil`

- `copyFile(File, File)`
- `createDirIfNotExists(File)`
- `createTempDir(String)`
- `deleteChildren(File)`
- `deleteFiles(File)`
- `deltree(File)`
- `getFileExtension(String)`
- `getRelativeFile(File, File)`
- `getRelativePath(File, File)`
- `isLegalFileName(String)`
- `isLegalFileNameChar(char)`
- `moveRecursive(File, File, Collection<File>)`

The following methods were removed from `org.eclipse.rdf4j.common.text.StringUtil`

- `concat(String...)`
- `decodeArray(String)`
- `deriveInitialText(String)`
- `encodeArray(String[])`
- `getAllAfter(String, char)`
- `getAllBefore(String, char)`
- `isGarbageText(String)`

## Acknowledgements

This release was made possible by contributions from
