---
title: "RDF4J 3.6.0 released"
date: 2021-02-22T10:00:00+0100
layout: "single"
categories: ["news"]
---
We are pleased to announce that RDF4J 3.6.0 is now available. This is a minor release with about XXXX 
improvements and bug fixes.

For full details, have a look at the [release notes](/release-notes/3.6.0). Below, we briefly highlight some
of the major improvements.

<!--more-->

## Improved SHACL Implementation
RDF4J likely sports the worlds only SHACL implementation capable of analyzing your transactional changes.
As you scale your database to hundreds of millions of triples you can trust our ShaclSail to take care of 
your data integrity with no more overhead than when you started out with just a few thousand triples. 

With RDF4J 3.6.0 our SHACL implementation is inching just that bit closer to full spec compliance with 
support for `sh:node` and `sh:property` to their fullest expressiveness. You can now nest `sh:property`
and `sh:node` to build richer shapes than ever before. 

This release also contains several bug fixes to the ShaclSail making it the most stable and reliable validation
engine we have ever shipped.


## Faster Isomorphism Detection
The graph isomorphism algorithm (used to check if models are equivalent under a blank node mapping by 
the Models.isomorphic utility function) has been completely reimplemented. Where the previous naive 
depth-first search approach had very poor performance (sometimes not terminating at all even on 
relatively small models), the current implementation, based on an approach outlined by Aidan Hogan in 
his 2017 paper "Canonical Forms for Isomorphic and Equivalent RDF Graphs: Algorithms for Leaning and 
Labelling Blank Nodes" [PDF] has been shown to have very good performance characteristics for almost 
all practical cases, and is guaranteed to terminate in reasonable time.

## Workbench updates


## Links

- [Download RDF4J](/download/)
- [release notes](/release-notes/3.6.0)

