---
title: "RDF4J 3.5.0 released"
date: 2020-12-09T00:00:00+10:00
layout: "single"
categories: ["news"]
---
We are pleased to announce that RDF4J 3.5.0 is now available. This is a minor release with about 29 improvements and bug fixes.

For full details, have a look at the [release notes](/release-notes/3.5.0). Below, we briefly point out some of the bigger new things.

<!--more-->
### Easier creation of IRIs and Literals

We've introduced new static factory methods to make your Java code shorter and easier to read. For example, instead of:

```java
ValueFactory valueFactory = SimpleValueFactory.getInstance();

IRI uncleBob = valueFactory.createIRI("http://example.org/bob");
IRI lastName = valueFactory.createIRI("http://example.org/name");
Literal example = valueFactory.createLiteral("Example");

model.add(uncleBob, lastName, example);
```

you can now use {{< javadoc "Values" "model/util/Values.html" >}} to do this:

```java
import static org.eclipse.rdf4j.model.util.Values.*;

model.add(iri("http://example.org/bob"), iri("http://example.org/name"), literal("Example"));
```

See the [RDF Model documentation](/documentation/programming/model) for more details.

### Custom character encoding 

All {{< javadoc "RDFWriter" "rio/RDFWriter.html" >}} and {{< javadoc "QueryResultWriter" "query/resultio/QueryResultWriter.html" >}} implementations for character-based syntax formats now allow the use of a custom writer, with a user-defined custom encoding. Useful if you must produce a CSV file with Windows-encoding instead of the default UTF-8!

### Creation of Literals with java.time values

The new (well, new'ish) `java.time` API is a replacement for the older and clunkier `java.util.Date` and `java.util.Calendar` classes. The RDF4J {{< javadoc "ValueFactory" "model/ValueFactory.html" >}} (as well as the new {{< javadoc "Values" "model/util/Values.html" >}} static factory methods) now supports creation of `Literal` objects directly from `java.time` values, automatically applying the correct XML Schema datatype.

### Peformance improvements

We've made some major improvements in performance of SPARQL querying. Allowing direct result passthrough when querying a remote SPARQL endpoint can result in a reduction of result processing time up to 80-100%. Another area performance has been improved is in the algorithms for ordering and comparing datatyped literals.

## Links

- [Download RDF4J](/download/)
- [release notes](/release-notes/3.5.0)

